What is the big O here?
The nice thing about Merce sword is
every case is the worst case scenario.
Every case is the best case scenario.
Every case is the average case scenario.
There's no difference between the best and
the worst case of merge sort, right?
Imagine if this was just 1,
2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, right?
This still would just get broken
down into seven arrays and
then stitched back together.
It actually makes zero
difference to merge sort.
If it's reverse sorted, sorted,
shuffled all those things you end
up with the exact same algorithm.
So that's goodness, right?
That's good news.
That's why most JavaScript
engines like spider monkey v8.
JavaScript core, most of them
use merge sort under the hood.
So if you call .sort or
they're probably calling merge sort.
They might be calling quicksort sometimes.
We're about to do quick sorts so
don't worry about that.
So that's the good thing about merge
sort is like, it's just a solid.
If you don't know what's
coming in Mercer is always
a safe bet that like this is
going to be pretty performant.
So, let's talk about
the big O of what it is then.
Does every number get compared to
every other number in the array?
No it doesn't.
Because we're using the fact that,
if you have one sorted array, and
you have another sorted array.
If 1 is smaller than 2,
then I know that everything else in
the array doesn't have to
be compared to 1 right?
1, by being smaller the 2
is also smaller than 3.
And also smaller than 6.
So I'm taking a shortcut here that
by knowing that 2 is larger than 1,
I also know that everything else in
that array is also bigger than 1.
So I'm skipping a bunch of comparisons
that I otherwise would have to do.
And the more and
more things I throw at Mercer sort so
if this ends up being of length 200 and
this is of length 200.
If one is smaller than two, then I know
that I don't have to compare one to
the other 199 elements in there right?
I'm skipping a lot of comparisons.
So you could say this grows
logarithmically, right.
By having more and
more I get the economies of scale and
I don't have to make
all those comparisons.
So I still have to look
at everything once.
Every number gets looked at
which says that it's end, right?
But I don't have to compare every number
to every other number, which is not,
means I don't quite get to n,
I get to log n.
So that's the big O of this computational
or this time complexity here is n log n.
Let's see how I wrote that.
So I don't know where it is anyway.
This is n log n computational complexity.
Because you have to look at
everything at least once.
That's just the virtue of sorting is that
every number has to be at least looked at,
which means that you're
looking at everything once.
But you're not comparing one thing to
everything else which makes it log n.
As opposed to Insertion Sort,
which it's worst case scenario.
Every number is compared
to every other number.
That's why that's n squared.
So the trick here for
n log n kind of sorting scenarios is
that you're looking for recursion.
It's not always gonna make it log n but
very frequently makes it log n.
Okay, spatial complexity, notice here that
we're creating a lot of arrays, right?
We're breaking up one array down
into a bunch of other arrays.
That means that we are no going to
have constant spacial complexity,
we're actually going to have
some spacial complexity here.
In fact, mercer ends up being one of
the worst ones because if you look here,
every number gets at least
one array created for it.
So if it's a one-to-one mappings
that means it's n right?
So it's spatial complexities its' n.
So for example, if you're on the ps3 and
we were sorting huge numbers of numbers
merge sort might be a bad idea, right?
Because it uses so much space.
Might not be, but who knows.
So space complexity is n.
All right, so
let's pop over to our code sandbox.
We're gonna be here in Merge Sort.
The sort visualizer will not work for
merge sort or quick sort,
because I didn't have a good way of
breaking down the snapshots very well.
So I just didn't try.
So why don't we go ahead and
give Mercer sort a shot?
What let's just like quickly
go over the base case,
the base case is what you get
an array of length 1 or 0.
It should always be length 1 but
just say length 1 or length 0.
Then you just return that array.
You don't do anything to it.
That's the base case.
You're gonna have to split the array into,
you're gonna call merge sort on the left
side, you're gonna call merge
sort on the right side.
And then you're gonna write
another function const
merge equals sorted array 1,
sorted array 2.
And that is going to
return one sorted array.
Let's actually just I'm going to
just diagram this out for you.
Here are you going to base
case Return if length 1 or 0.
Break into two smaller arrays.
Call, mercer sort on left and right.
Here, I'm just using terms left and right.
You can call them array one,
array two, array A, array B.
I don't know why I like having some like
cardinality to it of like this goes left,
this goes right.
In reality that doesn't make a difference.
It does make a difference in Quicksort
it doesn't emerge sort, okay?
And then you're gonna return
the merge of left and right.
So the first thing we want to
work on is the base case, right?
So, If nums.length is less than 2.
So if it's of length 1 or length 0 cuz
you can't have length negative of arrays,
then we're going to just return.
It's already sorted but
we're not gonna do anything.
I think to it.
This is the base case.
Everything's good.
I'm going to break this into a little
bit easier to read logic here.
So I'm going to say cons
length equals num sort length.
Cons middle equals math.floor
length divided by 2.
So math dot floor if you don't remember,
always rounds down on a number right?
So if this is of length 7,
then middle is going to come back as 4.
Constant left equals nums.slice,
0 to the middle.
slices, if you don't remember is
going to return to a sub array.
So this is going to be the smaller left
array which is gonna be from zero to
the middle of the array.
And then const right is
going to be nums slice.
And we can if we just give it middle, then
it'll automatically go to the end, right?
So this is gonna be
everything on the left.
This is gonna be everything on the right
Now you say const sorted,
left equals merge.
Sort left, const sorted,
right equals merge, sort, right?
And then down here,
we're just gonna say return,
merge, sort of left, sorted, all right.
Cool?
That is all you need to do.
Put this above here so
the comments are in the right place.
That's all merge sort is break
things down into smaller arrays and
then merge them back together.
So, merge, I'm just going to
call this left and right,
that's a bit easier for me to think of.
But just again, just reiterating and
I keep repeating and
the reason why I keep repeating
this because I forget.
Left and right are already sorted.
Just let's make a be abundantly
clear it's you need to
merge doesn't work if left and
right aren't already sorted.
So you don't have to handle the case of
what happens if left or right is unsorted.
That means something else broke,
something else broke somewhere else.
Okay const results.
There's gonna be an empty array.
And then I'm gonna do this
with kinda a fun way,
which I'm gonna say while left.length and
right.length.
And I'm gonna say if left of 0 is
less than or equal to right 0.
Okay, then we're gonna say results.push,
so
we're gonna put on the end
the front of left.
So we're gonna say left.shift.
And again, JavaScript has weird naming for
these kind of things shift is
like popping off the front right?
CF pop which removes the last
item of the array and returns it.
Shift does it from the front, right?
Other languages will call this dq, right?
I guess it depends depends on what
the language is trying to do anyways.
Suffice to say shift removes the first
item in the array and returns it.
So this is gonna take the front
item off of the left and
push it on the end of results, okay?
Else, we're gonna say results.push,
right.shift,
because we're not taking the left thing,
we're gonna take the right thing, okay?
Now again,
we're removing things from left and
right eventually we're going
to run out of things right?
Either left is going to empty or
right is going to empty first right?
One of them by definition
of what we're doing here.
This is gonna break and one of them
is still gonna have stuff left in it.
So what we can do after that is we can say
return results.concat left and right.
Now why does this work?
Results is gonna be an already
sorted list that was building, and
one of left and
right is gonna be empty, right?
What happens if you call
a concat on an empty array?
Nothing, right, nothing happens cuz it's
empty and there's nothing to concat.
So one of these is just going to
concatenate all of its numbers, right?
And we know everything that's left is
going to be larger than what's already in
results because it's at
the end of that array.
So it makes sense.
I mean you can have this keep
going until they both have.
If you did this instead or,
You'd have to mess around here
with the if logic to say like,
if left out length and right.length and
left is smaller than right, right?
Then do that.
But we don't have to do that because we're
just going to do this concut down here and
this'll work.
Okay, that is all of merge sort.
I mean, that's what nine to.
30 some odd lines of code,
some of the white-space it's, I mean,
let's go ahead and run and make sure
that I'm not pulling your leg here.
But if we go down to merge sort doesn't
feel like running it right now.
Merge sort, and I'm doing skip down here.
So that's actually correct.
And now I try running it again.
Merge sort is passing.
So again this is hard, right?
If you didn't quite get it, or
if you struggled with this,
there's a lot of abstract
stuff going on here.
And I can only do this with some ease
because I've done this so many times.
Because I've taught it to a lot of people.